\citet{Schraiber2015} suggested the possibility of estimating moments of the 
distribution of mutational effects for traits that deviate from normality. These
moments would be informative about the shape of the mutational distribution.
Using the expected trait moments (equation \eqref{eq:emoms}), we can attempt to
derive a method of moments estimator for the moments of the mutational
distribution. The system of equations for the first three central moments is
\begin{align}
\label{eq:genearch}
  &\widehat{M}_2 = \widehat{D}_{2,2}Lm_2 \nonumber \\
  &\widehat{M}_3 = \frac{1}{3}\widehat{D}_{3,3}Lm_3 \nonumber \\
  &\widehat{M}_4 = 3\widehat{M}_2^2 + (\widehat{D}_{4,4} +
  \frac{1}{3} \widehat{D}_{3,4} + \frac{2}{9} \widehat{D}_{2,4})Lm_4,
\end{align}
where $\hat{D}_{k,n}$ is an estimator of $\T \E[\mathbbm{T}_{k,n}]$, and the low
mutation rate approximation has been used. The moments of the trait distribution
only enter through products with the number of loci potentially affecting the
trait ($Lm_i$). If we have the estimates $\widehat{Lm_2}$, $\widehat{Lm_3}$, and
$\widehat{Lm_4}$, it is possible to estimate the ratios $m_2/m_4$ and $m_3/m_4$
for the mutational distribution. These ratios are meaningless on their own
because any value could be obtained by changing the measurement scale of the
trait. The identifiable quantity in this system of equation is the compound
parameter $\frac{m_3^2}{m_2m_4}$. This quantity reflects the degree of
mutational skew relative to the spread of the distribution, but it is not
possible to distinguish sparsity from skewed or heavy-tailed distributions of
mutational effects.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% TeX-master: "quant_gen_manu.tex"
%%% End:
