\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.8\textwidth]{figures/qst_deme_compare.pdf}
  \caption{\small A comparison of the Lewontin-Krakauer (LK) distribution with
    the distribution of $Q_{ST}$ derived in this paper based on the normal
    distribution arising in the infinitesimal limit. A model of no spatial
    structure and equal migration between demes is compared to a stepping stone
    model where populations are arranged in a ring. $F_{ST}$ is held constant
    while the number of demes is increased by altering the migration rate.
    Vertical lines show the mean $Q_{ST}$ under the different null
    distributions. Discordance between these lines illustrates that $Q_{ST}
    \neq F_{ST}$. }
  \label{fig:qst_deme}
\end{figure}
\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=0.5\textwidth]{figures/qst_deme_percentile_nospace.pdf}
  \caption{\small Differences in the $95^{\mathrm{th}}$ percentile of the
    $Q_{ST}$ distribution.}
  \label{fig:qst_perc}
\end{figure}
We can apply the neutral theory of quantitative traits to the divergence between
groups in structured populations, by asking what level of divergence is expected
in the infinitesimal limit. A common way to quantify the divergence in trait
value between groups is $Q_{ST}$, defined as the variance between the group
means divided by the total variance in the population. Since we use a haploid
model, we define $Q_{ST} = \frac{V_{between}}{V_{between} + V_{within}}$, where
\begin{equation*}
  V_{between} = \frac{1}{K} \sum_i \left( \bar{Y}_i - \bar{Y} \right)^2
\end{equation*}
and
\begin{equation*}
  V_{within} = \frac{1}{\sum_k N_k} \sum_i \sum_j \left( Y_{i,j} - \bar{Y}_i \right)^2.
\end{equation*}
Here, $Y_{i,j}$ is the trait value of individual $j$ in population $i$.

In the normal model, all $Y_{i,j}$ are normally distributed. Therefore,
$\bar{Y}_{i} - \bar{Y}$ and $Y_{i,j} - \bar{Y}_i$ are also normally distributed.
When population sizes are large, individual deviations from population means are
nearly uncorrelated as are $V_{between}$ and $V_{within}$. $V_{within}$ is
nearly constant across evolutionary realizations and is equal to $\sum_k N_k
E[\mathcal{T}_{k,k}] / \sum_k N_k$ because the within population variances are
approximately uncorrelated and their variances are order $1/N_k$. While we do
not have an explicit from for the between group variance, we can simulate from
its distribution by drawing a vector of $\bar{Y}_{i} - \bar{Y}$ values from a
multivariate normal distribution with mean zero and covariance matrix with
elements
\begin{equation}
  \Cov[\bar{Y}_{i} - \bar{Y}, \bar{Y}_{j} - \bar{Y}] =
  \sigma^2(\bar{\mathcal{T}}_{i,\cdot} + \bar{\mathcal{T}}_{j,\cdot} -
  \bar{\mathcal{T}}_{\cdot,\cdot} - \bar{\mathcal{T}}_{i,j}).
\end{equation}
To simulate $Q_{ST}$ values we do not need to know $\sigma^2$ because the scale
of the trait variance cancels in the $Q_{ST}$ ratio. Knowing expected coalescent
times within and between populations, perhaps measured in units of mutations, is
sufficient for simulation.

A classic result in evolutionary quantitative genetics is that $Q_{ST}=F_{ST}$
\citep{Whitlock1999}. $F_{ST}$, in this context, refers to a parameter of the
population. In particular, $F_{ST} = \frac{\bar{t} - \bar{t}_0}{\bar{t}}$, where
$\bar{t}$ is the expected coalescent time for two loci sampled at random from
the entire population and $\bar{t}_0$ is the expected coalescent time for two
loci sampled within a subpopulation \citep{Slatkin1991}. This value is constant
over realizations of the evolutionary process. $Q_{ST}$ for a particular trait
could refer to a state of the population or to an estimate of this state. As
shown above, $Q_{ST}$, as a state of the population, varies across evolutionary
realizations. Thus, there is no sense in which $Q_{ST}$ can be defined a
constant parameter in the way that $F_{ST}$ can be. The expectation of
$V_{between}$ is $\bar{t} - \bar{t}_0$, and the expectation of $V_{within}$ is
$\bar{t}_0$. $\frac{\E[V_{between}]}{\E[V_{between}] + \E[V_{within}]}$ is equal
to $F_{ST}$, but due to Jensen's inequality, the expectation of this ratio
($\E[Q_{ST}]$) is always less than $F_{ST}$.

The null distribution of $Q_{ST}$ derived here could be useful in testing
whether an observed value is unlikley under neutrality. Current goodness-of-fit
tests either compare $Q_{ST}$ to an empirical distribution of $F_{ST}$ values or
to a $\chi^2$ distribution. In the second, case an identical distribution to
that developed by \citet{Lewontin1973} is used as the null distribution for
$Q_{ST}$. The $chi^2$ testing procedure was suggested by \citet{Whitlock2009}
and is implemented in the program \textit{QstFstComp} \citep{Gilbert2015}. The
Lewontin-Krakauer (LK) distribution assumes independence between demes and
provides a good approximation in populations without spatial structure (Figure
\ref{fig:qst_deme}). When demes are strongly correlated, such as in spatial
structured populations, the LK distribution is a very poor approximation. Even
when the distributions appear qualitatively similar, there are substantial
differences in tail probabilities (Figure \ref{fig:qst_perc}).

The infinitesimal null distribution described here is similar to the extension
of the Lewontin-Krakuer $F_{ST}$ test developed by \citet{Bonhomme2010} to
account for the correlation structure between subpopulations. The
\citet{Bonhomme2010} method treats allele frequencies as multivariate normal
with covariance matrix parameteried by coancestry coefficients.
\citet{Ovaskainen2011} use a normal model similar to that found in the
infinitesimal limit here, but the covariance matrix is also based on coancestry
coefficients. When phenotypic and genetic divergence is mostly driven by changes
in allele frequency, the coalescent and coancestry based models should be very
similar. However, the coalescent model is ultimately preferable since it is the
correct null model at any scale of population divergence in the infinitesimal
limit. When only allele frequency data are available, a coancestry model is the
only option, but it is still better to model shared ancestry between populations
than to use a single value of $F_{ST}$.
%%% Local Variables:
%%% TeX-master: "short_report.tex"
%%% End:
